README.md, before:

# Minimalist Contact Form Web Component

A lightweight, customizable web component for collecting contact inquiries. This component provides a clean, professional contact form with built-in validation and modern styling that can be embedded anywhere.

![default styles](assets/form.png)

![light mode examples](assets/light.png)

![dark mode examples](assets/dark.png)

## Features

- **Shadow DOM Encapsulation**: Styles and DOM are isolated from the rest of the page
- **Built-in Validation**: Client-side validation with real-time feedback
- **Phone Number Formatting**: Automatic formatting using Cleave.js (XXX-XXX-XXXX)
- **Email Validation**: Proper email format validation
- **Responsive Design**: Works on all device sizes
- **Customizable Styling**: Configurable colors, fonts, and themes
- **Universal Theme Detection**: Automatically detects dark/light mode from system preferences or common website theme patterns (data-theme, dark class, etc.)
- **Loading States**: Visual feedback during form submission
- **Error Handling**: Graceful error handling with user-friendly messages

## Installation

#### Via CDN (preferred)

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/DevManSam777/minimalist-contact-form@main/contact-form.js" defer></script>
```

#### Alternatively 
1. Download the contact form component files
2. Include them in your HTML file:

```html
<!-- CSS -->
<style>
  /* Your page styles */
</style>

<!-- HTML -->
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api-endpoint.com/api/leads"
  success-message="Thanks! We'll get back to you soon."
></contact-form>

<!-- JavaScript -->
<script src="path/to/contact-form.js" defer></script>
```

## Basic Usage

Add the contact form to your HTML:

```html
<contact-form></contact-form>
```

## Customization

### API Endpoint

Set a custom API endpoint for form submission:

```html
<contact-form endpoint="https://your-api-endpoint.com/api/leads"></contact-form>
```

### Custom Messages

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  success-message="Message sent! 🎉"
  error-message="Oops! Please try again."
></contact-form>
```

### Custom Colors & Styling

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  primary-color="#6366f1"
  background-color="#ffffff"
  text-color="#374151"
  border-radius="12px"
></contact-form>
```
```

### Google Fonts

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  google-font="Inter"
  font-size="16px"
></contact-form>
```

### Dark Mode Support

```html
<!-- Automatic dark mode detection (detects system preference and website themes) -->
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  dark-primary-color="#60a5fa"
  dark-background-color="#1f2937"
  dark-text-color="#f9fafb"
></contact-form>
```

## Available Attributes

| Attribute | Description | Default |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| `endpoint` | API endpoint URL for form submission | Required |
| `heading` | Optional form heading/title | None |
| `primary-color` | Main button/accent color | `#3b82f6` |
| `background-color` | Form background color | `#ffffff` |
| `text-color` | Text color | `#374151` |
| `border-color` | Input border color | `#d1d5db` |
| `input-background-color` | Input field background color | Same as `background-color` |
| `border-radius` | Corner roundness | `6px` |
| `font-family` | Custom font family | System fonts |
| `font-size` | Base font size | `14px` |
| `google-font` | Google Font name | None |
| `success-message` | Custom success message | `Thank you! Your message has been sent.` |
| `error-message` | Custom error message | `Sorry, there was an error. Please try again.` |
| `dark-primary-color` | Primary color for dark mode | `#60a5fa` |
| `dark-background-color` | Background color for dark mode | `#1f2937` |
| `dark-text-color` | Text color for dark mode | `#f9fafb` |
| `dark-border-color` | Border color for dark mode | `#4b5563` |
| `dark-input-background-color` | Input field background color for dark mode | Same as `dark-background-color` |

## Form Fields

The contact form includes the following fields:

- **First Name** (required) - Minimum 1 character
- **Last Name** (required) - Minimum 1 character  
- **Email** (required) - Valid email format
- **Phone** (optional) - Formatted as XXX-XXX-XXXX 
- **Message** (required) - Minimum 1 character

## Validation

The component includes comprehensive validation:

- **Real-time validation**: Fields are validated on blur and re-validated on input
- **Visual feedback**: Invalid fields show red borders and error messages
- **Valid fields**: Show green borders when properly filled
- **Form submission**: Prevents submission until all validation passes
- **Phone formatting**: Automatically formats phone numbers as you type

## Form Data Structure

The form submits the following data structure to your API:

```javascript
{
  // Core form fields (user input)
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services..."
}
```

## Form Data Structure

The form submits the following data structure to your API:

```javascript
{
  // Core form fields (user input)
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services..."
}
```

### Complete Data Structure (DevLeads Integration)

For compatibility with DevLeads, the component sends a complete data structure with default values. You can modify the component HTML to add input fields for any of these additional fields (must clone repo and setup your own cdn delivery or add web component javascript file to your project):

```javascript
{
  // User-entered data
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services...",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - auto-generated
  businessName: "John Doe", // Combines first + last name
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - optional business fields (add inputs for these if needed)
  businessPhone: "",
  businessPhoneExt: "",
  businessEmail: "",
  businessServices: "",
  phoneExt: "",
  textNumber: "",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - service preferences
  preferredContact: "email",
  serviceDesired: "Web Development",
  hasWebsite: "no",
  websiteAddress: "",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - billing address (with defaults)
  billingStreet: "N/A",
  billingAptUnit: "",
  billingCity: "N/A", 
  billingState: "N/A",
  billingZipCode: "00000",
  billingCountry: "USA",
  billingAddress: {
    street: "N/A",
    aptUnit: "",
    city: "N/A",
    state: "N/A",
    zipCode: "00000",
    country: "USA"
  },
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - system flag
  isFormSubmission: true
}
```

## Server-Side Requirements

The component sends data to the specified API endpoint via a POST request with:

- **Method**: POST
- **Content-Type**: application/json
- **Request Body**: JSON object containing all form fields

The server should respond with:
- **Success**: 200/201 status code
- **Error**: 4xx/5xx status code with optional error message



## Browser Compatibility

This component uses modern web standards:
- Custom Elements v1
- Shadow DOM v1
- ES6+ features
- Fetch API

Compatible with all modern browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge).

## Dependencies

The component dynamically loads:
- [Cleave.js](https://github.com/nosir/cleave.js) for phone number formatting

## Error Handling

The component handles various error scenarios:
- **Network errors**: Displays user-friendly network error messages
- **Server errors**: Shows server response errors to users
- **Validation errors**: Prevents submission and highlights invalid fields
- **Browser compatibility**: Graceful degradation for older browsers

## Performance

- **Lightweight**: Minimal footprint with no external dependencies (except Cleave.js)
- **Lazy loading**: Google Fonts and Cleave.js are loaded only when needed
- **Efficient rendering**: Uses Shadow DOM for optimal performance
- **Memory management**: Properly cleans up event listeners

## Accessibility

- **Semantic HTML**: Uses proper form elements and labels
- **ARIA support**: Includes appropriate ARIA attributes
- **Keyboard navigation**: Full keyboard accessibility
- **Screen reader friendly**: Works with assistive technologies
- **Focus management**: Clear focus indicators

## Integration Examples

### With Vercel Functions
```javascript
// api/contact.js
export default async function handler(req, res) {
  if (req.method !== 'POST') {
    return res.status(405).json({ message: 'Method not allowed' });
  }

  const formData = req.body;
  
  // Process the form data
  // Send emails, save to database, etc.
  
  return res.status(200).json({ message: 'Success!' });
}
```

##### HTML
```html
<contact-form endpoint="/api/contact"></contact-form>
```

### With Netlify Functions
```javascript
// netlify/functions/contact.js
exports.handler = async (event, context) => {
  const formData = JSON.parse(event.body);
  
  // Process the form data
  
  return {
    statusCode: 200,
    body: JSON.stringify({ message: 'Success!' })
  };
}
```
##### HTML
```html
<contact-form endpoint="/.netlify/functions/contact"></contact-form>
```

## Need a complete backend solution?

Check out our compatible server implementation:
- [Contact Form Server](https://github.com/DevManSam777/forms-server)
- Includes email notifications, database storage, and more

## License

[MIT License](LICENSE)

Copyright (c) 2025 DevManSam

Commit message:

Add npm package installation instructions to README

README.md, after:

# Minimalist Contact Form Web Component

A lightweight, customizable web component for collecting contact inquiries. This component provides a clean, professional contact form with built-in validation and modern styling that can be embedded anywhere.

![default styles](assets/form.png)

![light mode examples](assets/light.png)

![dark mode examples](assets/dark.png)

## Features

- **Shadow DOM Encapsulation**: Styles and DOM are isolated from the rest of the page
- **Built-in Validation**: Client-side validation with real-time feedback
- **Phone Number Formatting**: Automatic formatting using Cleave.js (XXX-XXX-XXXX)
- **Email Validation**: Proper email format validation
- **Responsive Design**: Works on all device sizes
- **Customizable Styling**: Configurable colors, fonts, and themes
- **Universal Theme Detection**: Automatically detects dark/light mode from system preferences or common website theme patterns (data-theme, dark class, etc.)
- **Loading States**: Visual feedback during form submission
- **Error Handling**: Graceful error handling with user-friendly messages

## Installation

### npm Package (Recommended)

Install the package:

```bash
npm install @devmansam/forms
```

Import in your JavaScript/TypeScript:

```javascript
// Import the contact form
import '@devmansam/forms/contact-form';
```

> **Note**: The `@devmansam/forms` package includes both the contact form and web inquiry form. You can import them individually as shown above, or import both with `import '@devmansam/forms'`.

For bundlers like Vite, Webpack, or Rollup, this is the recommended approach. The forms are native Web Components and work with any framework (React, Vue, Angular, Svelte, etc.) or vanilla JavaScript.

### CDN

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/DevManSam777/minimalist-contact-form@main/contact-form.js" defer></script>
```

## Basic Usage

Add the contact form to your HTML:

```html
<contact-form></contact-form>
```

## Customization

### API Endpoint

Set a custom API endpoint for form submission:

```html
<contact-form endpoint="https://your-api-endpoint.com/api/leads"></contact-form>
```

### Custom Messages

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  success-message="Message sent! 🎉"
  error-message="Oops! Please try again."
></contact-form>
```

### Custom Colors & Styling

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  primary-color="#6366f1"
  background-color="#ffffff"
  text-color="#374151"
  border-radius="12px"
></contact-form>
```
```

### Google Fonts

```html
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  google-font="Inter"
  font-size="16px"
></contact-form>
```

### Dark Mode Support

```html
<!-- Automatic dark mode detection (detects system preference and website themes) -->
<contact-form
  endpoint="https://your-api.com/contact"
  dark-primary-color="#60a5fa"
  dark-background-color="#1f2937"
  dark-text-color="#f9fafb"
></contact-form>
```

## Available Attributes

| Attribute | Description | Default |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| `endpoint` | API endpoint URL for form submission | Required |
| `heading` | Optional form heading/title | None |
| `primary-color` | Main button/accent color | `#3b82f6` |
| `background-color` | Form background color | `#ffffff` |
| `text-color` | Text color | `#374151` |
| `border-color` | Input border color | `#d1d5db` |
| `input-background-color` | Input field background color | Same as `background-color` |
| `border-radius` | Corner roundness | `6px` |
| `font-family` | Custom font family | System fonts |
| `font-size` | Base font size | `14px` |
| `google-font` | Google Font name | None |
| `success-message` | Custom success message | `Thank you! Your message has been sent.` |
| `error-message` | Custom error message | `Sorry, there was an error. Please try again.` |
| `dark-primary-color` | Primary color for dark mode | `#60a5fa` |
| `dark-background-color` | Background color for dark mode | `#1f2937` |
| `dark-text-color` | Text color for dark mode | `#f9fafb` |
| `dark-border-color` | Border color for dark mode | `#4b5563` |
| `dark-input-background-color` | Input field background color for dark mode | Same as `dark-background-color` |

## Form Fields

The contact form includes the following fields:

- **First Name** (required) - Minimum 1 character
- **Last Name** (required) - Minimum 1 character  
- **Email** (required) - Valid email format
- **Phone** (optional) - Formatted as XXX-XXX-XXXX 
- **Message** (required) - Minimum 1 character

## Validation

The component includes comprehensive validation:

- **Real-time validation**: Fields are validated on blur and re-validated on input
- **Visual feedback**: Invalid fields show red borders and error messages
- **Valid fields**: Show green borders when properly filled
- **Form submission**: Prevents submission until all validation passes
- **Phone formatting**: Automatically formats phone numbers as you type

## Form Data Structure

The form submits the following data structure to your API:

```javascript
{
  // Core form fields (user input)
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services..."
}
```

## Form Data Structure

The form submits the following data structure to your API:

```javascript
{
  // Core form fields (user input)
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services..."
}
```

### Complete Data Structure (DevLeads Integration)

For compatibility with DevLeads, the component sends a complete data structure with default values. You can modify the component HTML to add input fields for any of these additional fields (must clone repo and setup your own cdn delivery or add web component javascript file to your project):

```javascript
{
  // User-entered data
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe", 
  email: "john@example.com",
  phone: "555-123-4567",
  message: "Hello, I'm interested in your services...",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - auto-generated
  businessName: "John Doe", // Combines first + last name
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - optional business fields (add inputs for these if needed)
  businessPhone: "",
  businessPhoneExt: "",
  businessEmail: "",
  businessServices: "",
  phoneExt: "",
  textNumber: "",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - service preferences
  preferredContact: "email",
  serviceDesired: "Web Development",
  hasWebsite: "no",
  websiteAddress: "",
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - billing address (with defaults)
  billingStreet: "N/A",
  billingAptUnit: "",
  billingCity: "N/A", 
  billingState: "N/A",
  billingZipCode: "00000",
  billingCountry: "USA",
  billingAddress: {
    street: "N/A",
    aptUnit: "",
    city: "N/A",
    state: "N/A",
    zipCode: "00000",
    country: "USA"
  },
  
  // DevLeads integration fields - system flag
  isFormSubmission: true
}
```

## Server-Side Requirements

The component sends data to the specified API endpoint via a POST request with:

- **Method**: POST
- **Content-Type**: application/json
- **Request Body**: JSON object containing all form fields

The server should respond with:
- **Success**: 200/201 status code
- **Error**: 4xx/5xx status code with optional error message



## Browser Compatibility

This component uses modern web standards:
- Custom Elements v1
- Shadow DOM v1
- ES6+ features
- Fetch API

Compatible with all modern browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge).

## Dependencies

The component dynamically loads:
- [Cleave.js](https://github.com/nosir/cleave.js) for phone number formatting

## Error Handling

The component handles various error scenarios:
- **Network errors**: Displays user-friendly network error messages
- **Server errors**: Shows server response errors to users
- **Validation errors**: Prevents submission and highlights invalid fields
- **Browser compatibility**: Graceful degradation for older browsers

## Performance

- **Lightweight**: Minimal footprint with no external dependencies (except Cleave.js)
- **Lazy loading**: Google Fonts and Cleave.js are loaded only when needed
- **Efficient rendering**: Uses Shadow DOM for optimal performance
- **Memory management**: Properly cleans up event listeners

## Accessibility

- **Semantic HTML**: Uses proper form elements and labels
- **ARIA support**: Includes appropriate ARIA attributes
- **Keyboard navigation**: Full keyboard accessibility
- **Screen reader friendly**: Works with assistive technologies
- **Focus management**: Clear focus indicators

## Integration Examples

### With Vercel Functions
```javascript
// api/contact.js
export default async function handler(req, res) {
  if (req.method !== 'POST') {
    return res.status(405).json({ message: 'Method not allowed' });
  }

  const formData = req.body;
  
  // Process the form data
  // Send emails, save to database, etc.
  
  return res.status(200).json({ message: 'Success!' });
}
```

##### HTML
```html
<contact-form endpoint="/api/contact"></contact-form>
```

### With Netlify Functions
```javascript
// netlify/functions/contact.js
exports.handler = async (event, context) => {
  const formData = JSON.parse(event.body);
  
  // Process the form data
  
  return {
    statusCode: 200,
    body: JSON.stringify({ message: 'Success!' })
  };
}
```
##### HTML
```html
<contact-form endpoint="/.netlify/functions/contact"></contact-form>
```

## Need a complete backend solution?

Check out our compatible server implementation:
- [Contact Form Server](https://github.com/DevManSam777/forms-server)
- Includes email notifications, database storage, and more

## License

[MIT License](LICENSE)

Copyright (c) 2025 DevManSam
